## 2. Theory and definitions

### 2.1 A mathematical definition of the problem of fragmenting molecules for QC torsion drives

A molecular structure can be modeled as a degree-bounded graph $G = (V, E)$, where $V$ are the nodes and $E$ are the edges.
In a molecular graph, the nodes correspond to atoms and edges correspond to covalent bonds.
We define rotatable bonds as a set bonds in the molecule that are not in rings, $\mathcal{E} \subset E$, and $\mathcal{G}$ as a set
of allowable subgraphs, where each subgraph $G'(V', E') \in \mathcal{G}$ is built around a central, rotatable bond, $e' \in \mathcal{E}$
with the following conditions:

* The number of atoms in $G'$, $|V'|$, are $4 \leq |V'| \leq |V|$
* The minimum edges in $G'$ are $e'$ and all $e \in E$ such that $e, e'$ share a vertex
* All $v \in V$ adjacent to $e$
* If $v \in V'$ is in a ring in $G$, the ring should be included in $G'$

The weights on $e'$ are given by $\delta(e'; G')$, where $\delta$ is the RMSE of the torsion potential around the central, rotatable bond in the full graph $G$ compared to the subgraph $G'$.
Since $\delta(e'; G')$ is computationally expensive to evaluate, we use a surrogate, $\gamma(e'; G')$, which we define as the difference of the WBO on the central, rotatable bond $e'$ in $G'$ and in the full graph $G$.
In order to calculate the WBO, we need to "cap" open valences by adding additional atoms to ensure the resulting molecule is not a radical.
The rule we use are defined in Section 3.4.

We want to minimize $\gamma(e'; G')$, while also minimizing the cost of each subgraph.
We define the cost as estimated in Figure @fig:b3lyp_scaling

$$ c(G') \propto (|V'|)^{2.6} $$

which leads to minimizing

$$ \sum_{e' \in \mathcal{E}} |\gamma(e';  G') + c(G'; e')|$$

The search space of $\mathcal G$ for each rotatable bond is combinatorial, and its upper bound is ${|V|\choose{4}} + {|V|\choose{5}} + ... {|V|\choose{|V|}}$ since all $G' \in \mathcal G$ need to be connected and rings are not fragmented.
To reduce the search space, we also define a list of functional groups that should not be fragmented in @tbl:fgroups.

Given how large the search space can become, we use several heuristics, described in Section 3.4.

### 2.2 Physical definitions

In most MM force fields, torsions are defined by the four sequentially-bonded atoms involved in a torsion.
However, the torsion energy function (or profile) of a bond is determined by a combination of local and non-local effects from conjugation, hyperconjugation, sterics, and electrostatics [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00585; @doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00645; @doi:10.1038/35079036; @doi:10.1021/jp046290d].
In this study, we define _local atoms_ as those within two bonds of the central bond of a torsion, and _remote atoms_ as any atom beyond those two bonds.

Steric and elecrostatic interactions are, in principle, accounted for by non bonded terms in most force fields, so a torsion profile would ideally primarily capture conjugation or hyperconjugation effects, and only the 1-4 electrostatics.
Using small fragments to generate QC torsion profiles reduces non-local electrostatics and steric interactions from convoluting the data. However, conjugation and hyperconjugation are non local properties and remote chemical changes can influence the extent of conjugation and/or hyperconjugation.
In this study, we aim to avoid removing remote chemical substituents that impact the torsion of interest via conjugation and hyperconjugation by first understanding how the strength of the central bond is altered by remote chemical modifications.
Below, we give a more precise definition to _conjugation_ and _hyperconjugation_ and how we use these terms in this paper.

Conjugation and hyperconjugation describe the sharing of electron density across several bonds.
Conjugation is formally defined as the overlap of p-orbital electrons across $\sigma$ bonds [@doi:10.1002/jlac.18993060107; @url:https://goldbook.iupac.org/terms/view/C01267], such as what occurs in benzene or butadiene.
Hyperconjugation is the interaction of electrons in a donating bonding orbital to an anti-bonding orbital [@doi:10.1021/ja01846a008].
There are several modes of hyperconjugation such as $\sigma \to \sigma^*$, $\sigma \to \pi^*$, and $\pi \to \sigma^*$.
In this study, for simplicity, we use the term conjugation to refer to all modes of conjugation and hyperconjugation.
