## 5. Detailed method

### 5.1 QCArchive data generation and archiving
The MolSSI [@doi:10.1063/1.5052551] QCArchive project is a platform for computing, organizing, and sharing quantum chemistry data.
Computations with this platform automatically record all input and output quantities ensuring the reproducibility of all computations envolved.
In the case of computing with the MolSSI QCArchive instances, all data is automatically hosted and can be queried using the platform.

#### 5.1.1 Submitting computations to QCArchive

`Add scripts here?`{.red}

#### 5.1.2 Details on QC and MM torsion scans.

All torsion scans were computed with the TorsionDrive [@url:https://github.com/lpwgroup/torsiondrive] project, which makes choices of new constrained optimizations to evaluate.
The required constrained optimizations were then computed with the geomeTRIC [@url:https://github.com/leeping/geomeTRIC] standalone geometry optimizer interfaced to the QCEngine [@url:https://github.com/molssi/qcengine] project.

To ensure a fair comparison between the QC and MM torsion scans, the only change in the torsion scan procedure was to switch out the program, which evaluated the gradient at each step in the geomeTRIC optimization.
For QC, gradients were computed at B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP with the Psi4 [@doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00174] program. This level of theory was chosen based on benchmark conducted by the
Open Force Field consortium for fitting Parsley [@url:https://openforcefield.org/news/introducing-openforcefield-1.0/#benchmarking-parsley]
For molecular mechanics, gradients were run using OpenMM [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005659] with the OpenFF parsley Force Field (v1.0.0) [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3483227].

### 5.2 Calculating Bond orders


#### 5.2.1 AM1 WBO and AM1 ELF10 WBO
To calculate AM1 ELF10 WBO, we used OpenEye's QUACPAC toolkit [@url:https://www.eyesopen.com/quacpac] (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2). The
ELF10 WBO comes along free after an AM1-BCC charge fitting procedure. For ELF10 WBOs generated in this paper, we used the `get_charges` function
in the `chemi.py` module in `fragmenter` versions v0.0.3 and v0.0.4. To calculate AM1 WBO for individual conformers, we used the `OEAssignPartialCharges`
with the `OECharges_AM1BCCSym` option from the QUACPAC toolkit for each conformer generated with Omega [@url:https://www.eyesopen.com/omega] (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2)
which is called for the `get_charges` function.
For AM1 WBOs calculated to verify the results from the validation set, we generated conformers using the `generate_grid_conformer` function in the `chemi.py` module in `fragmenter`
version v0.0.4.+25.gbb12030

#### 5.2.2 Wiberg Bond Orders in Psi4

Wiberg-Löwdin bond orders are calculated in Psi4 with the keyword `scf_properties: wiberg_lowdin_indices` using Psi4 version 1.3. All bond orders were computed during the torsion scan computations.

### 5.3 Datasets

#### 5.3.1 Kinase inhibitor dataset
The kinase inhibitor dataset consists of 43 FDA approved kinase inhibitors (smi files is in the SI) with their Omega generated conformers (OpenEye veriso 2019.Apr.2, `generate_conformers`
function in the `chemi.py` module in `fragmenter` version v0.0.4). AM1 WBOs were calculated as described above, for all conformers of all 43 kinase inhibitors. B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP Wiberg-Löwdin
bond orders were calculated for 9 kinase inhibitors and Omega generated conformers after a B3LYP-D3P(BJ) / DZVP geometry optimization. The DFT results are available on QCArchive
as an `OptimizationDataset` named `Kinase Inhibitors: WBO Distributions`.

The variance of the WBO distributions were calculated using the numpy [@doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37] var function version 1.16.2 and their confidence intervals were calculated using
arch `IIDBootsrap` function [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.2613877] version 4.8.1. To calculate the correlation matrix, we calculated the
Pearson correlation coefficient with the numpy [@doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37] `corrcoef` function version 1.16.2.
Scripts and data used to generate and analyze this dataset are in
[github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/manuscript-figures/kinase_inhibitors_wbos](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/tree/master/manuscript-figures/kinase_inhibitors_wbos)

#### 5.3.2 Subsituted phenyl dataset
The substituted phenyl dataset consists of 3,458 substituted phenyl molecules where the substituents chosen to span a large range of electron donating and withdrawing
groups. We arrived at 3,200 molecules by attaching 26 different functional groups to 5 scaffolds (Figure @fig:subsituted_phenyls, A) at the X~1~ position, and then
attach the 26 functional group (and H) at the X~2~ position for a total of 133 molecules per functional group (26 * 5  + 3 (for molecules with H at the X~2~ position)).
The AM1 ELF10 WBOs were calculated as described above. We selected molecules for QC torsion scans as follows:
1. From the 26 functional groups, we only selected molecules from 18 functional groups, skipping X~1~s that either did not have a rotatable bond (fluorine, chlorine, Iodine,
bromine, nitrile, oxygen), were too congested (triflouromethyl, trimethylamonium) or where the WBOs on the bonds attaching X~1~ to the phenyl ring did not change much
with different chemical group at the X~2~ position (methyl).
2. For the 18 functional groups, we chose molecules that were evenly spaced along the WBO range of that functional group, up to 15 molecules. While all the skipped
functional groups for X~1~ were allowed to be at X~2~, we did not include the negative oxygen at X~2~ because OpenFF have
not yet benchmarked the level of theory to use for anions.
3. After selection, we had 140 molecules that we submitted to QCArchive for both QC and MM torsion scan. The dataset is available on QCArchive as a `TorsionDriveDataset` named
`OpenFF Subsituted Phenyl Set 1`. This dataset also includes the biphenyl torsion scans shown in Figure @fig:biphenyls.

Scripts used to generate and analyze this dataset can be found in [github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/phenyl_benchmark](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/tree/master/phenyl_benchmark)

There is another subsituted phenyl set on QCArchive whose results are not shown in this paper because it was run with a different level of theory as the default
OpenFF level of theory, included anions which we did not yet decide how to handle and did not have good coverage of WBO ranges.

#### 5.3.3 Exhaustive fragmentation dataset

The exhaustive fragmentation dataset was generated by filtering DrugBank version (version 5.1.3 downloaded
on 2019-06-06) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1037] with criteria described in section 4 and repeated here for clarity:
1. FDA approved
2. Ring sized between 3 and 14 heavy atoms
3. Rotatable bonds between 4 and 10
4. At least one aromatic ring
5. Only 1 connected component

This left us with 730 molecules. To expand states, we used `OEGetReasonableTautomers` from QUACPAC (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2) in the
`states.py` module in `fragmenter` (version v0.0.2+175.g6fbbf32 for this original set, but versions v0.0.3 and v0.0.4 will
generate the same results with the same options). We set `pKaNorm` to True so that the ionization state of each tautomer
is assigned to a predominant state at pH ~ 7.4. This generated 1289 molecules.

We then used the `CombinatorialFragmenter` from `fragmenter` version v0.0.2+179.g0e7e9e3 (versions v0.0.3 and v0.0.4 will generate
the same fragments with the same options) to generate all possible fragments for each molecules. We set the option `functional_groups`
to False so that all functional groups besides rings will also get fragmented so we can use the data to explore which functional groups
should not be fragmented. We used the default settings for all other options ( `min_rotor` is 1 and `min_heavy_atoms` is 4 so that the smallest fragments have at least one torsion.
`max_rotors` is the number of rotors in the parent molecules so that the largest fragment generated is one less rotor than the parent molecule).
This generated ~300,000 fragments.

We then used Omega (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2) to generate conformers for each fragment and calculated each conformer's WBOs
as described above. All scripts used to generate this dataset are in
[github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/combinatorial_fragmentation](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/tree/master/combinatorial_fragmentation).
The dataset is available as zip files on `(hold for link to where we will host the data)`{.red}.

### 5.4 Fragmenting molecules
The `fragmenter` package provides several fragmentation schemes with various options. Below we discuss different modes of
fragmentation and their options.

#### 5.4.1 Exhaustive fragmentation generates all possible fragments of a parent molecule.
This functionality is provided by the `CombinatorialFragmenter` class in the `fragment.py` module. To use this class, the user
needs to provide an openeye molecule. `fragmenter` provides a list of functional groups SMARTS in a yaml file located in `fragmenter/data/fgroup_smarts_combs.yml`
that it will not fragment by default. This list is given in table @tbl:fgroups_comb. The list is different than the default list used on the `WBOFragmenter`
because here the carbon bonded to the functional groups are also tagged. To allow all functional groups to be fragmented, the user can set the parameter
`functional_groups = False`. This option will fragment all bonds besides bond in rings. The user can also provide their own dictionary of
functional group SMARTS patterns that they wish to avoid fragmenting.

| Chemical group | SMARTS pattern |
|---|---|
| amide | `[NX3R0][CX3](=[OX1])` |
| sulfone |`[#16X4](=[OX1])=([OX1])` |
| phosphine_oxide | `[PX4](=[OX1])([CX4])([CX4])` |
| phosphon | `[PX4](=[OX1])([OX2])([OX2])` |
| trimethyl | `[CX4!H]([CX4H3])([CX4H3])([CX4H3])` |
| tri_halide | `[#6]((([F,Cl,I,Br])[F,Cl,I,Br])[F,Cl,I,Br])` |
| carboxylic_acid | `[CX3](=O)[OX2H1]` |
| ester | `[CX3](=O)[OX2H0]` |
| dimethyl | `[CX4H1]([CX4H3])([CX4H3])` |
| carbonyl | `[CX3R0]=[OX1]` |
| alkyne | `[CX2]#[CX2]` |
| nitrile | `[NX1]#[CX2]` |

Table: Default functional groups that the `CombinatorialFragmenter` will not fragment. This list is not comprehensive and is
different than the list used for the `WBOFragmenter` {#tbl:fgroups_comb}

The user can also set the minimum and maximum number of rotatable bonds, and minimum heavy atoms in a fragment.

#### 5.4.2 Generate minimal fragments
The `PfizerFragmenter` implements the scheme developed at Pfizer and described in [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373]. It uses the same list
of functional groups as the `WBOFragmenter` uses. The user can also provide their own SMARTS patterns of functional groups not to fragment.

#### 5.4.3 Using the WBO as a surrogate for changes in chemical environment.
The `WBOFragmenter` implements the FBO scheme described in this paper. The functional groups that are not fragmented are given in table @tbl:fgroups.
Users can add more SMARTS patterns if needed.

When the WBO on a central bond in a minimal fragment has been disrupted more than the threshold, remote atoms need to be added
onto the fragment. However, there are multiple ways to grow out a fragment and enumerating all possible ways to find the best one
can become too computationally expensive. Therefore, we need to use heuristics to decide where to add the next atoms.
The two heuristics available in `fragmenter` are:

1. **Shortest path length**
Here, the bond with the shortest path to the central bond is added next. The rationale for this heuristic is that atoms closer
to the central bond will have a greater influence to the bond's chemical environment. If more than one connected bond has the shortest path
to the central bond, the bond with the higher WBO is added next.

2. **Greatest WBO**
Here, the bonds connected to the fragment that have the greatest WBO is added next. The rationale for this heuristic is that
bonds with higher WBO are more likely to be involved in extended conjugation that can influence the central bond.

Both of these heuristics will sometimes give different results `[Hold for SI figure]`{.red}. We found that for the benchmark set we tested,
the shortest path heuristic preformed better, or found more optimal fragments when compared to using the greatest WBO heuristic `[Hold for SI]`{.red}.

Currently, `fragmenter` depends on OpenEye to provides three modes of fragmentation described here. In the future, `fragmenter`
will be incorporated into the `openforcefield` toolkit and will have the option to use RDKit [@url:http://www.rdkit.org/],
an open source cheminformatic libraries. However, given that RDKit supports EHT instead of AM1, the fragments might be different.

