## Supporting Information {.page_break_before #SI}

![**QC gradient evaluations scale similarly on various processor**
CPU time (wall time * nthreads) for one gradient evaluation vs. heavy atoms in molecules. All CPUS shown in this figure
are Intel(R) Xeon(R)](images/SI_Intel_scaling_4.svg){#fig:intel_scaling}

![**QC gradient evaluations scale similarly on various processor**
Same as Figure @fig:intel_scaling but on AMD processors](images/SI_AMD_scaling_3.svg){#fig:amd_scaling}

![**Distributions of number of gradient evaluations per optimizations for different size molecules**
The number of gradient evaluations per optimization depends on many factors such as initialization and tolerance, but there
is also a slight dependency on molecular size as shown in this figure](images/gradients_per_opts_2.svg){#fig:grads_per_opt}

![**Distribution of optimizations per torsion drive**
This figures shows the distributions of optimizations per torsion drive when using wavefront propagation](images/opts_per_td_4.svg){#fig:opts_per_td}

![**Variance and correlations of WBO distributions with respect to conformations for a set of kinase inhibitors**
This figure shows WBO distributions and correlations for a set of kinase inhibitors calculated at B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP.
Optimized conformations and their WBOs are on QCArchive (`OptimizationDataset`, named `Kinase Inhibitors: WBO Distributions`)](images/SI-KI-all.svg){#fig:kinase_inhibitors}

![**Variance and correlations of AM1 Wiberg bond order distributions with respect to conformations are higher for conjugated bonds**
The trend seen in @fig:wbo_var_corr for higher level of QM theory (B3LYP-D3(BJ) / DZVP) is also observed at AM1.
**[A]** Gifitnib with its rotatable bonds highlighted. **[B]** WBO distributions over 232 conformations of the highlighted bonds. The variance
and their 95% CI is shown. **[C]** Pearson correlation coefficients for WBOs in every bond against all other bonds with respect to conformations.](images/SI-WBO-dist.svg){#fig:si_wbo_dist}

![**Druglike molecules used to calculate ELF10 AM1 WBOs**
This set of molecules were selected to cover bonds of different types and multiplicities](images/druglike_mols_for_wbo_dist_4.svg){#fig:wbo_dist_mols}

![**Hammett parameters are anti-correlated with ELF10 WBOs**
**[A]** Hammett sigma meta parameters vs AM1 ELF10 WBOs of X~1~ meta to carboxylic acid.
 **[B]** Same as **A** but for para substituents](images/SI-hammett.svg){#fig:hammett}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_1.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_1}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_2.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_2}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_3.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_3}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_4.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_4}

![**QC torsion scans and corresponding WBOs for substituted phenyl set**
QC torsion scans, WBOs corresponding to scan and torsion barrier heights vs ELF10 WBOs for phenyl set. QC scan colors correspond to highlighted central
bonds shown on the right. The molecules are labeled with their ELF10 WBOs.](images/SI_substituted_phenyl_td_5.svg){#fig:phenyl_td_5}

![**Validation set**
All molecules used in the validation set of fragmentation schemes. The bonds are highlighted by how sensitive they are to
remote fragmentation. The redder bonds are more sensitive while the WBO distributions around the blue bonds do not change
much with remote fragmentation.](images/figure-10-SI.svg){#fig:full_validation_set}

![**WBO fragmentation generates minimal fragment**
This figure illustrates some cases where the Pfizer scheme and WBO scheme generate the same minimal fragment. While in most cases these fragments
have WBO distributions that are close to the parent WBO distributions of the highlighted bond, sometimes both minimal fragments are equally poor.
**[A]**, **[B]**, and **[C]** show fragments of both schemes where important remote, chemical groups are not in the fragment so their overlapping distributions (orange and green)
are far from the parent WBO distributions (blue distributions). **[D]**, **[E]**, and **[F]** are the same as **A**, **B** and **C**, but the fragments do have the
important chemical substituents so both perform equally well.](images/SI-pfizer-wbo-equal.svg){#fig:equal-fragments}

![**When Phosphate is removed, WBO distribution shifts even when the phosphate is six bonds away**
Examples from benchmark set where remote phophsate groups induce long range effects of **[A]** six bonds away and **[B]** four bonds away.](images/SI-phosphate.svg){#fig:si-phosphate}

![**When a protonated nitrogen is removed, WBO distribution shifts even when the nitrogen is up to eight bonds away**
Selected examples from the benchmark set were remote nitrogen groups induce long range effects. The distance of the remote nitrogen
ranges from three bonds away up to eight bonds away.](images/SI-nitrogen.svg){#fig:si-nitrogen}

![**Removing a nitrile group shifts the WBO distribution.**
Examples from the benchmark set. Removing remote nitrile groups shift the WBO distribution.](images/SI-nitrile.svg){#fig:si-nitrile}

![**Removing a sulfonamide group shifts WBO distribution.**
Removing the sulfonamide (orange) that is four bonds away moves the fragment's WBO distribution further away from parent WBO distribution (blue).](images/SI-sulfonamide.svg){#fig:si-sulfonamide}

![**Removing a deprotonated oxygen shifts the WBO distribution.**
Removing a negatively charged nitrogen can effect bonds up to six to eight bonds away.](images/SI-oxygen.svg){#fig:si-oxygen}

![**Removing a ntiro group shifts the WBO distribution.**
Removing a ntiro group effects bonds up to five bonds away.](images/SI-nitro.svg){#fig:si-nitro}

![**Removing sulfur shifts the WBO distribution.**
Removing sulfur shifts the WBO, but the shift is smaller than for other functional groups and this is not always captured by the WBO scheme.
The figure on the right shows the fragment that the WBO scheme generates (green), however, it also includes the ring. The smaller fragment that
has the sulfur (red) has an ELF10 WBO that is ~0.1 lower than in the parent, but the WBO distribution (shown in red) is closer to the parent WBO distribution (blue, distance score 0.08)
than the fragment without sulfur (orange, 0.133)](images/SI-sulfur.svg){#fig:si-sulfur}